[DOC-10001] Add upgrade content for 24.1 pre-production previews (#18427)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/cockroachcloud/upgrade-to-v24.1.md

Your cluster will be unavailable while its single node is stopped and restarted with {{ page.page_version }}. Prepare your application for this brief downtime, typically a few minutes.

The [**SQL Users**]({% link cockroachcloud/managing-access.md %}#create-a-sql-user) and [**Tools**]({% link cockroachcloud/tools-page.md %}) tabs in the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} Console will also be disabled during this time.

</section>

### Review breaking changes

{% comment %} Be careful with this logic and the page-level variable page_version {% endcomment %}
{% assign rd = site.data.versions | where_exp: "rd", "rd.major_version == page.page_version" | first %}

{% if page.pre_production_preview == true %}
Review the backward-incompatible changes and deprecated features announced in each {{ page.page_version }} testing release. If any affect your applications, make the necessary changes before proceeding.
{% else %}
Review the backward-incompatible changes and deprecated features announced in the [{{ page.page_version }} release notes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/releases/{{ page.page_version }})
{% endif %}

### Reset SQL statistics

> Before upgrading to CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}, it is recommended to reset the cluster's SQL statistics. Otherwise, it may take longer for the upgrade to complete on a cluster with large statement or transaction statistics tables. This is due to the addition of a new column and a new index to these tables. To reset SQL statistics, issue the following SQL command:

Reviewer: 'SQL statistics' could be a link to https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/cost-based-optimizer#table-statistics

> Before upgrading to CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}, it is recommended to reset the cluster's SQL statistics. Otherwise, it may take longer for the upgrade to complete on a cluster with large statement or transaction statistics tables. This is due to the addition of a new column and a new index to these tables. To reset SQL statistics, issue the following SQL command:

Author: ```suggestion
Before upgrading to CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}, it is recommended to reset the cluster's [SQL statistics]({% link {{ page.page_version }}/cost-based-optimizer.md %}#table-statistics). Otherwise, it may take longer for the upgrade to complete on a cluster with large statement or transaction statistics tables. This is due to the addition of a new column and a new index to these tables. To reset SQL statistics, issue the following SQL command:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SELECT crdb_internal.reset_sql_stats();
~~~

## Step 5. Start the upgrade

To start the upgrade process:

1. [Sign in](https://cockroachlabs.cloud/) to your CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} account.

1. In the **Clusters** list, select the cluster you want to upgrade.

1. Select **Actions > Upgrade {% if page.pre_production_preview == true %}to Pre-Production Preview{% else %}major version{% endif %}**.

1. In the **Upgrade your cluster** dialog, review the pre-upgrade message and then click {% if page.pre_production_preview == true %}to Pre-Production Preview{% else %}major version{% endif %}.

<section class="filter-content" markdown="1" data-scope="multi-node">
Your cluster will be upgraded one node at a time without interrupting the cluster's overall health and availability. This "rolling upgrade" will take approximately 4-5 minutes per node.
</section>

<section class="filter-content" markdown="1" data-scope="single-node">
Your single-node cluster will be unavailable for a few minutes while the node is stopped and restarted with CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}.
</section>

> After it is started, an upgrade cannot be cancelled. Instead, you can wait for the upgrade to finish, then [roll it back back](#roll-back-the-upgrade) for up to 72 hours, after which time it will be finalized and cannot be rolled back.

Reviewer: typo: "roll it back back"

> After it is started, an upgrade cannot be cancelled. Instead, you can wait for the upgrade to finish, then [roll it back back](#roll-back-the-upgrade) for up to 72 hours, after which time it will be finalized and cannot be rolled back.

Author: ```suggestion
After it is started, an upgrade cannot be cancelled. Instead, you can wait for the upgrade to finish, then [roll it back](#roll-back-the-upgrade) for up to 72 hours, after which time it will be finalized and cannot be rolled back.
```

## Step 6. Monitor the upgrade

Once your cluster is running CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}, you will have approximately 72 hours before the upgrade is automatically finalized. During this time, it is important to [monitor your applications](#monitor-your-application) and [expect temporary limitations](#expect-temporary-limitations).

If you see unexpected behavior, you can [roll back](#roll-back-the-upgrade) to {{ page.prev_version }} during the 72-hour window.

### Monitor your application

Use the [DB Console]({% link cockroachcloud/tools-page.md %}) or your own tooling to monitor your application for any unexpected behavior.

- If everything looks good, you can wait for the upgrade to automatically finalize or you can [manually trigger finalization](#finalize-the-upgrade).

- If you see unexpected behavior, you can [roll back to the latest patch release of {{ page.prev_version }}](#roll-back-the-upgrade) during the 72-hour window.

### Expect temporary limitations

> Most {{ page.page_version }} features can be used right away, but some will be enabled only after the upgrade has been finalized. Attempting to use these features before finalization will result in errors:

Reviewer: typo: this sentence ends in a colon but is not followed by a list of things.  Suggest ending with a period since not followed by list

Author: Yeah this is currently an empty list until we have the info for v24.1. 
```suggestion
Most {{ page.page_version }} features can be used right away, but some will be enabled only after the upgrade has been finalized. Attempting to use these features before finalization will result in errors. {% comment %}TODO: List of temporary limitations for GA{% endcomment %}
```

---
title: Upgrade to CockroachDB v24.1 Pre-Production Preview
summary: Learn how to upgrade a cluster in CockroachDB Cloud to v24.1 Pre-Production Preview
toc: true
docs_area: manage
page_version: v24.1
prev_version: v23.2
pre_production_preview: true
pre_production_preview_version: v24.1.0-beta.1
---

{% if page.pre_production_preview == true %}
[CockroachDB {{ page.pre_production_preview_version }}](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/releases/{{ page.page_version }}#{{ page.pre_production_preview_version | replace: ".","-"}}) is available to CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} clusters for testing and experimentation.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_danger}}
This [testing release]({% link releases/index.md %}#release-naming) is not qualified for production environments and not eligible for support or uptime SLA commitments.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> An [Org Administrator]({% link cockroachcloud/authorization.md %}#org-administrator) can upgrade your CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster from the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} Console. This page guides you through the process of upgrading.

Author: ```suggestion
An [Org Administrator]({% link cockroachcloud/authorization.md %}#org-administrator) can upgrade your CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster from the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} Console. This page shows how to upgrade a CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster to {{ page.pre_production_preview_version }} for testing and experimentation.
```

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}
Upgrading from {{ page.prev_version }} to {{ page.pre_production_preview_version }} is a major-version upgrade. Upgrading a CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster to a new major version is opt-in. Before proceeding, review the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} [CockroachDB Cloud Upgrade Policy](https://cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/upgrade-policy#pre-production-preview). After a cluster is upgraded to a Pre-Production Preview release, it is automatically upgraded to all subsequent releases within the same major version—including additional beta and RC releases, the GA release, and subsequent patch releases after GA, as patch version upgrades. To learn more, refer to [Patch Version Upgrades]({% link cockroachcloud/upgrade-policy.md %}#patch-version-upgrades).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> This page shows how to upgrade a CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster to {{ page.pre_production_preview_version }} for testing and experimentation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

{% else %}

> Now that [CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/releases/ {{ page.page_version }}) is available, an [Org Administrator]({% link cockroachcloud/authorization.md %}#org-administrator) can upgrade your CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster from the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} Console. This page guides you through the process for an Admin.

Author: ```suggestion
Now that [CockroachDB {{ page.page_version }}](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/releases/ {{ page.page_version }}) is available, an [Org Administrator]({% link cockroachcloud/authorization.md %}#org-administrator) can upgrade your CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster from the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} Console. This page shows how to upgrade a cluster in CockroachDB Cloud to {{ page.page_version }}.
```

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}
Upgrading a CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} cluster to a new major version is opt-in. Before proceeding, review the CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.cloud }} [CockroachDB Cloud Upgrade Policy](https://cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/upgrade-policy).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> This page shows how to upgrade a cluster in CockroachDB Cloud to {{ page.page_version }}.

Author: ```suggestion
```
